README.md, before:

# RNA-contacts

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.6507594.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6507594)

Prediction of RNA-RNA contacts from RIC-seq data. Developed by Sergei Margasyuk (smargasyuk@gmail.com) and Dmitri Pervouchine (pervouchine@gmail.com).

## Description

This package contains a pipeline for prediction of RNA-RNA contacts from RIC-seq data (Cai et al., [2020](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2249-1)). 

## Usage

### Step 1: Obtain a copy of this workflow

[Clone](https://help.github.com/en/articles/cloning-a-repository) this repository to your local system, into the place where you want to perform the data analysis.

    git clone https://github.com/smargasyuk/RNAcontacts.git
    cd RNAcontacts
    git checkout v0.2.2

### Step 2: Configure workflow

Configure the workflow according to your needs via editing the files in the `config/` folder. Adjust `config.yaml` to configure the workflow execution, and `samples.tsv` to specify your sample setup.

### Step 3: Install Snakemake

Install Snakemake using [conda](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html):

    # install mamba package manager if you don't have it
    conda install -n base -c conda-forge mamba
    conda create -c bioconda -c conda-forge -n snakemake snakemake

For installation details, see the [instructions in the Snakemake documentation](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html).

### Step 4: Execute workflow

Activate the conda environment:

    conda activate snakemake

Test your configuration by performing a dry-run via

    snakemake --use-conda -n

Execute the workflow locally via

    snakemake --use-conda --cores $N

using `$N` cores or run it in a cluster environment via

    snakemake --use-conda --cluster qsub --jobs 100

or

    snakemake --use-conda --drmaa --jobs 100

See the [Snakemake documentation](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/executable.html) for further details.

#### Test run

To make a test run, type

```
snakemake --use-conda --configfile config/config.test.yaml -c8 test
```

The rule will download a toy dataset (sample sheet, truncated fastq files, genome, and genome annotation confined to the first 100MB of chr1), unpack, and execute the pipeline. The output files in `results/test_hg19/test/contacts` will be compared to those provided in the archive.

#### Run on full RIC-seq data

Download the RIC-seq files for HeLa cell line from GEO repository [GSE127188](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE127188). Download the control RNA-seq files from ENCODE consortium [webpage](https://www.encodeproject.org/).

The files are as follows:

```
  RNASeq_HeLa_total_rep1:
    - fastq/ENCFF000FOM.fastq
    - fastq/ENCFF000FOV.fastq
  RNASeq_HeLa_total_rep2:
    - fastq/ENCFF000FOK.fastq
    - fastq/ENCFF000FOY.fastq
  RIC-seq_HeLa_rRNA_depleted_rep1:
    - fastq/SRR8632820_1.fastq
    - fastq/SRR8632820_2.fastq
  RIC-seq_HeLa_rRNA_depleted_rep2:
    - fastq/SRR8632821_1.fastq
    - fastq/SRR8632821_2.fastq
```

### Step 5: Investigate results

The output of the pipeline consists of the following files:

+ `results/{genome}/{project}/{sample}/contacts` is the list of contacts and their respective read counts in tsv format (columns 1-3 and 4-6 are the contacting coordinates, column 7 is read count). 
+ `results/{genome}/{project}/views/global/contacts.bed` is the BED12 file with contacts on the same chromosome and length less than the threshold defined in `config`. This file for HeLa experiment is available at [10.5281/zenodo.6511343](https://zenodo.org/record/6511343).

Commit message:

update READMEs and link them together; put actual data into config and sample sheet

README.md, after:

# RNAcontacts

Prediction of RNA-RNA contacts from RIC-seq data. Developed by Sergei Margasyuk (smargasyuk@gmail.com) and Dmitri Pervouchine (pervouchine@gmail.com).

## Description

This package contains a pipeline for prediction of RNA-RNA contacts from RIC-seq data (Cai et al., [2020](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2249-1)). 

## Usage

### Step 1: Obtain a copy of this workflow

[Clone](https://help.github.com/en/articles/cloning-a-repository) this repository to your local system, into the place where you want to perform the data analysis.

    git clone https://github.com/smargasyuk/RNAcontacts.git
    cd RNAcontacts
    git checkout v0.2.2

### Step 2: Configure workflow

Configure the workflow according to your needs via editing the files in the `config/` folder. Adjust `config.yaml` to configure the workflow execution, and `samples.tsv` to specify your sample setup (described in [Settings](config/README.md)).

### Step 3: Install Snakemake

Install Snakemake using [conda](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html):

    # install mamba package manager if you don't have it
    conda install -n base -c conda-forge mamba
    conda create -c bioconda -c conda-forge -n snakemake snakemake

For installation details, see the [instructions in the Snakemake documentation](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html).

### Step 4: Execute workflow

Activate the conda environment:

    conda activate snakemake

Test your configuration by performing a dry-run via

    snakemake --use-conda -n

Execute the workflow locally via

    snakemake --use-conda --cores $N

using `$N` cores or run it in a cluster environment via

    snakemake --use-conda --cluster qsub --jobs 100

or

    snakemake --use-conda --drmaa --jobs 100

See the [Snakemake documentation](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/executable.html) for further details.

#### Test run

To make a test run, type

```
snakemake --use-conda --configfile config/config.test.yaml -c8 test
```

The rule will download a toy dataset (sample sheet, truncated fastq files, genome, and genome annotation confined to the first 100MB of chr1), unpack, and execute the pipeline. The output files in `results/test_hg19/test/contacts` will be compared to those provided in the archive.

#### Run on full RIC-seq data

Download the RIC-seq files for HeLa cell line from GEO repository [GSE127188](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE127188). Download the control RNA-seq files from ENCODE consortium [webpage](https://www.encodeproject.org/).

The files are as follows:

```
  RNASeq_HeLa_total_rep1:
    - ENCFF000FOM.fastq.gz
    - ENCFF000FOV.fastq.gz
  RNASeq_HeLa_total_rep2:
    - ENCFF000FOK.fastq.gz
    - ENCFF000FOY.fastq.gz
  RIC-seq_HeLa_rRNA_depleted_rep1:
    - SRR8632820_1.fastq.gz
    - SRR8632820_2.fastq.gz
  RIC-seq_HeLa_rRNA_depleted_rep2:
    - SRR8632821_1.fastq.gz
    - SRR8632821_2.fastq.gz
```

Put the files somewhere, fill the sample sheet (described in [Settings](config/README.md)), and run the pipeline.

### Step 5: Investigate results

The output of the pipeline consists of the following files:

+ `results/{genome}/{project}/{sample}/contacts` is the list of contacts and their respective read counts in tsv format (columns 1-3 and 4-6 are the contacting coordinates, column 7 is read count). 
+ `results/{genome}/{project}/views/global/contacts.bed` is the BED12 file with contacts on the same chromosome and length less than the threshold defined in `config`.

These files for HeLa experiment are available at [10.5281/zenodo.6511342](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6511342).
